After the success of All My Sons, Miller felt empowered to create something more risky and began to cast about for something on which to build his next play. After meeting his uncle Manny Newman at a matinee performance of All My Sons and asking how he was doing, Miller got the first glimmer of a new idea. Instead of replying, Manny had gone straight into saying how well his sons were doing, as if he felt that he had to build them up in competition against their successful playwright cousin. The fact that Manny did not even pause before taking their conversation in an unexpected direction gave Miller the idea to write a play without transitions, where the dialogue would flow from one scene to the next without any apparent breaks. Instead of using a chronological order in which single events followed on from one another, he wanted to create a form that displayed the past and the present as if they were both occurring at the same time. In this way, he would be able to transmit to the audience exactly what was going on inside the mind of his protagonist; indeed, an early title for the play was The Inside of His Head. It would be retitled: Death of a Salesman.
In spring 1948, Miller spent six weeks writing Death of a Salesman in a small studio that he had built for himself outside the Roxbury, Connecticut, house. Miller had been interested in carpentry since he was a teenager when he bought a stack of lumber to build a porch onto the family house with his Uncle Lee Balsam. Miller gave the father of his new play, Willy Loman, the same love of craftsmanship and working with wood. His uncle Manny became a prototype for Willy. He was someone who also worked with his hands and a salesman with a wild imagination and tendency to brag. Manny would manipulate the truth to his own advantage and saw everything as some kind of competition that he and his family had to win. He was also prone to black moods and bouts of despair and may have committed suicide. Manny's eldest child Buddy, like Willy's son Biff, was athletic and popular, and the younger son Abby, like Willy's younger son Happy, was a ladies' man.
Directed by Elia Kazan, who had done such a good job on Miller's previous play, All My Sons, and supported by an ingenious set and lighting designed by Jo Mielziner, Death of a Salesman premiered on February 10, 1949, at the Morosco Theater in New York City. Enthusiastic reviews swiftly made it the "must-see" play of the season, and Miller garnered nearly every award available. At times comic, yet also poetic and tragic, it also had sufficient realism to make it easy to involve any audience; but Death of a Salesman was a new type of serious play merging the forms of realism and expressionism to suggest new directions and possibilities for all of U.S. drama. It has become, perhaps, the best-known U.S. play worldwide.
Critical Commentary
Miller's lengthy setting and character descriptions contribute much to an understanding of the play. Willy is presented as living in a claustrophobic urban setting that is indicative of the harsh life that he has chosen. His home is surrounded by apartment houses that emanate a threatening orange glow. When memory takes over, this glow gives way to a more dreamlike background with shadowy leaves and music, evoking a happier, pastoral era. At the close of the play, however, we see the looming "hard towers" of the apartment building dominating the setting once more. When Willy initially goes from the real world into his first reverie, the apartment houses in the background are faded out, and the lighting suggests that the stage is covered with leaves, as the opening pastoral music reasserts itself. With this change in atmosphere, Willy's dream world of the past is recreated for the audience as it occurs in Willy's memory.
The opening setting provides the background for Willy Loman's life and some of the rationale behind his death. The faint pastoral melody played on a flute recalls both Willy's father who played such an instrument and the pastoral dream that may have suited Willy's nature better than the harsh world of business that he chose. Miller's emphasis on the refrigerator in the kitchen and a silver athletic trophy above Willy's bed represent the only achievements in Willy's life—a few basic luxuries for the house and a fleeting, winning moment from his family's past. The refrigerator, we later learn, is on the verge of breaking down, and the trophy was won by Willy's oldest son, Biff, just before he dropped out of high school and became a virtual vagrant. Willy's activities, aside from his job as a salesman, are part of a symbolic network. He plants seeds just as he plants false hopes. Both will die and never come to fruition because the house has become enclosed by the city and because his dreams are unrealistic in the harsh, competitive society that these apartments represent. The front porch, constructed out of stolen lumber, is indicative of how their lives, as well as their house, have been built on something false. Willy does not fit into the modern world of machinery; likewise, the values that he espouses, where deals are made with a smile and a handshake, are those of a bygone age. To illustrate this point, Miller frequently depicts Willy's uneasy relationship with machinery such as his car, his refrigerator, and Howard's recording machine.
Writing in a style that scholar Brenda Murphy has coined subjective realism, Death of a Salesman carefully blends a realistic picture of a salesman's home and life in the post-Depression years with the subjective thoughts that are going through its central protagonist's head. The play's clever use of time that allows the audience to view both past and present occurring at the same moment on the same stage set fully captured the concept of simultaneity for which Miller had been striving. The Lomans act and sound like natural, everyday people who face everyday social and domestic concerns. However, Willy's waking–dream sequences that recall past moments in time, the increasingly evident symbolism of various stage effects (lighting and sound), and the play's subtle protest against accepted social expectations also satisfy the requirements of an expressionistic work.
Although Willy Loman's situation is often described as timeless, Death of a Salesman can be read as an illustration of the historical economic interests and forces operating on U.S. society from the turn of the century to when the play was written. This was a period of major changes in the economic structure of the United States. Willy witnessed the pioneers' sense of hope and possibility at the beginning of the new millennium, a time when his father and brother both left home to embrace such possibilities to the full. While his father vanished from sight, his brother came out ahead. Willy lived through the wild prosperity of the 1920s and was inspired by meeting successful salesman Dave Singleman to go into sales. This was a period when he felt he could become successful in the big city, until the 1929 Wall Street crash marked the start of the Great Depression. The Depression lasted throughout the 1930s, and Willy evidently found his products increasingly hard to sell in a period when nobody had money to buy anything but necessities.
With the economy being jump-started for the 1940s by the increased market demands and industrial advances of World War II, Willy saw a renewed sense of vigor in the U.S. economy that probably created much of the hope that he places in the prospects of his sons. However, it is becoming a young man's world, and Willy, in his sixties, is swiftly becoming outmoded, his sales style also being out of date. It is hardly surprising that he ends up being fired as he illustrates to his own boss his incapacity to make a sale when he fails to persuade him to give him a desk job. The play was written and is set in 1948 at the time when forces of capitalism and materialism came to the fore and technology made its greatest inroad into the lives of everyday people. Death of a Salesman depicts the impact of these forces on the lives of an ordinary family—the Lomans. It is little wonder that so many of those watching the original production felt that they were witnessing their own story or that of a family member.
The Lomans are depicted as social failures in their inability to make money and live happily and comfortably, but the deeper question asked by the play is whether this failure is because of their own inadequacies or caused by society's unrealistic standards of success? In Miller's opinion, the blame of failure should not be attached to insignificant cogs in the social machine like the Lomans but should be partially attributed to the larger social forces that operate on people's lives. Economics play an important part in the creation of such forces. By the time the play was written, Miller saw business matters at odds with conventional morality, with humanity threatened by the onset of technology and the growing pressures of ownership; all these issues are reflected in the dilemmas of the Loman family and the other characters to whom they are economically linked.

